From Hanselman it's dot
com. It's Hansel minutes, a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number 73. Recorded
live Wednesday, June 18, 2007.
Support for Hanselman it's is
provided by Tellerik already controls
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers
journal, the world's leading Dutton
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
two of his interns about
languages and the future of
engineering. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman, and this is another
episode of Hanselminutes. And this
week we're going to be
talking with my interns. I
got an email from my
friend Scott bellwether, and he
said, put your interns on
the show. And he gave
me a list of some
questions, and I thought that
was a great idea. So
this year at Kirlian, we've
got two interns high school
interns. Introduce yourself, sir. Shady
Glenn from tshirt high school.
How old are you? Shady
18. Okay. And other intern.
Hi, this is Eric and
I'm 17 and I'm going
to be a senior at
West view high school. Okay,
cool. So you guys are
both seniors in high school
and you shady. You were
here last year. Yep. And
Eric, this is Eric's first
year. This is my first
year having, having two interns.
And what did you work
on last year? Shady. Remind
us last year I worked
with building a mobile banking
demo, a mobile demo. And
so you could bank from
a cell phone or a
mobile phone. Now you didn't
see sharp. And had you
ever done C-sharp before? Not
at all. So, I mean,
I was there, but you
know, tell the audience, I
was like, you're an intern.
Like what happened? You, you
arrived in that. I just
put really hard problems on
your plate. I had to
solve a, what was it?
It was a word search
and I hadn't really worked
with anything close to that
complex before I'd been working
with a visual basic and
just a little bit of
Java. So C-sharp, I had
to completely learn that from
scratch pretty much. So remember,
the problem I gave you
was a, is a 230,000
word dictionary in a text
file and then give you
a 50 by 50 grid.
And I said, basically, you
don't do the boggle go
up down, left, right. Diagonal.
And then I think after
you got that, right. I
said, and backwards and diagonal
it to go all the
different directions. I think. How
fast did you end up?
How fast at the program
running the end? It didn't
run that fast. I think
it took a minute to
get through it maybe. Yeah.
So it was an algorithms
exercise, really? It wasn't right.
And mine wasn't effective. Then
you showed Me yours and
it was finished in like
15 seconds or something. Well,
that wasn't yeah, I showed
you mine, but yeah, absolutely.
And then Eric, I gave
the same problem to you
and you had done some
work, some Java, but you're
more of a PHP guy
if I remember correctly, right?
Oh yeah. I don't, I
didn't really have that much
experience with Java, but yeah,
I do PHP more and
this is the first time
you learned C sharp as
well. So I gave you
the same exact problem, except
I learned from having you
shady as the intern last
year. And here we did
a little more test driven
development. And also I, Eric
had the benefit of a
profiler. So we actually profiled
the code and sped it
up. And I think it
ended up being a, I
think it was around a
0.4 0.6 seconds. Yeah. So
it was pretty good not,
and it wasn't trying to
like compare you guys to
each other, but no, it
was, it was a situation
where the tooling really kind
of made it possible for
us to see what was
going on. And before I
was trying to make it
simple, if I remember correctly,
I made you code in
notepad for awhile before I
gave you visual studio with
Erica. Did it a little
differently. I don't know. I'm
just learning as well as,
as you guys are now.
Eric, how old were you
when you started using computers?
Probably started using computers when
I was like eight or
nine, probably on an old
Apple, really. And those Macintoshes
with the green and black
really. And that's interesting. Cause
that's also one of the
computers that I worked on.
Now. I am twice your
ages. I would have expected
that you would never have
seen an Apple before. And
do you use those floppy
disks? Like five and a
quarter inch floppies. Oh yeah.
We use those all through
grade school, grade school. I
think. I didn't see my
first Apple until a little,
a little later. And what
about you Shay? Wow. I
started out when I was
about six, I think. And
we had a windows 3.1
machine and that was mainly
just playing some educational games.
Like I don't remember what
they were, but later it
was a spelling jungle and
stuff like that. But then
yeah, I saw, I had
seen an Apple when I
was in, I went to
a private school for a
couple of years and we
used, Did you immediately want
to code on the thing
or was it just playing?
It started Just playing. And
then I, after I got
into more games, more sophisticated
stuff, StarCraft and that, then
I just got into computers
and just continue going from
there and wanted to learn
how to make stuff. And
was it gaming primarily that
got you working on the
computer? Both of you guys.
I just liked it. The
capabilities of what it could
do and yeah, but gaming
was definitely a big part
of it. What was your
first email address? No. What
was it, but when was
it? Right? Cause I was
on the, I wasn't in,
I mean, for those of
us who were around before
that we had CompuServe. I
don't know if you ever
saw that kind of stuff,
coffee. Sure. The original AOL
before they had a windows
interface genie, there was one
that Sears sold. I forgot
the name of the listeners
will remember, but there's all
these different services that you'd
use for dial up before.
Right? I had, it was
a, when I got into
middle school, we actually started
needing internet for just school
projects and stuff, but it
was through AOL prodigy. That
was what I was trying
to remember how to G
okay. No, it was through
AOL on it. Sorry. Pretty
bad. Did. So your first
address was an AOL address?
Yeah, mine was probably a,
mine was probably a AOL
or Yahoo address. I don't
quite remember that much. Do
remember what your first web
browser was? What browser? Probably
AOL 5.0 or six point.
Oh yeah. Now have you
ever seen like a, an
old machine older than an
Apple? If you've seen any
max you've seen punch card
machines, you're just, you know,
you're saying The mainframe, I've
seen a typewriter, I electric
typewriter or a typewriter with
actual, It was a manual
typewriter. It was the ones
that like, if you type
the wrong key, I pretty
much have to redo the
entire paper. Those kinds. Yeah.
They use white out to
her parents kind of, yeah.
Now how I noticed that
you've got a lot of
people on your chat is
chat something that's kind of
instrumental to your life. I
mean, you've got you chat
with people and ask questions
or any of the people
on your team That programmers
as well. I think I'm
probably one of the only
programmers at my school. There's
one, there's one that graduated,
but yeah, that's pretty much
it just me and him.
Wow. Now there's some talk
in the, in the, in
the world and the community
right now that there's a,
we're going to run out
of engineers. That there's a
lot fewer people going into
school. And you just kind
of, as a, as a
throwaway statement said that you
don't know of a lot
of people at your school,
Right? Code. Yeah. Why do
you think that is? I
just think there's a lack
of interest in doing that
or else it's probably a
little bit too complex for
people to do. Huh? Do
you think it's a concern
that there's a lot of
math Possibly. Yeah. You thought
about a lot of math
while you've been here. Internship
did use a lot of
math. I didn't really think
it came as a, too
much of a whole problem.
Okay. So it wasn't like
an oppressive amount of math.
It's not like I'm asking
you to do equations. No,
it's, it's pretty straightforward stuff.
Shady look like you've got
a question or an opinion.
Yeah. Well, I think it's
more of a lack of
opportunities actually, because at my
school there's a bunch of
programmers just cause we have
the opportunity. We have a
computer teacher there who offers
a computer class, a programming
class and it's pretty full
year round it's he uses
gaming to try and get
people hooked on into it.
But it's still there. We
get a bunch of good
programmers. Well, not a bunch,
but we probably get two
or three each year that
are good programmers. But do
you think that Two or
three programmers per year per
high school is really gonna,
you know, solve the, solve
the problem and yeah, No,
I don't think it'll solve
the problem, but that's a
good place to start. We
have more than three programmers,
but a lot of them
just lose interest or just
want to do something else
in high school instead of
just straight computers. So when,
when you ask, you know,
other other kids like, Hey,
what do you wanna do
when you grow up? Or
in this case, you guys
are 18 next year. What
are you majoring in? What
are these guys majoring in
community Political science business. Yeah.
Stuff like that. I dunno.
It's just, people don't want
to spend their doing that
coding. I guess they want
to do something more exciting.
Is there a coolness factor
here? Someone had to code
the iPhone, Right? That it
all depends on what you
do, how you define. Cool.
But I, I would think
that programming, something like that,
it's awesome. You know? Oh,
that's why you're an intern
right here because you guys,
and here we are in
the summer, right? In the,
in beautiful rainy, Portland's pouring
rain right now. And you
other, what are your friends
doing? Are they having internships?
No, they're sitting on the
couch just watching TV. Okay.
Some of them have a
job, but other than that,
Eric, a lot of my
friends are doing internships, but
I think only one other
one has something remotely related
to doing computers. She's over
at Nike doing web design.
But I think like going
with a Scott's previous statement,
like engineering is probably getting,
I think in my opinion
is probably getting bigger, but
it's just not in the
computer related field, like in
the news. And just along
my peers, there's a lot
of people going into chemical
and vial engineering. It's just,
I don't know if there's
much interest for computers and
itself. So do you notice
a difference at all, between
interest in software versus interest
in hardware? I would think
that since all of you
guys have mobile phones basically
implanted in your heads, that
you would, and I mean,
is technology a big part
of your interaction and your
daily life and your SMS
and friends and stuff? Wouldn't
that cause more interest in
technology? I think people are
more, more interested in the
products then through the process
of doing it, like just
with iTunes, like most people
don't really know what happens
behind it or like using
the iPhone or any iPod
or anything like that. They
just want to use it
and show it off, but
they don't really care what's
going on behind it. One
of the things that I
like about engineering is the
act, the idea that you're
actually going to build something
and you get to point
at it and say, I
made that, you know, this
idea, you know, the Legos
and the erector sets and
Lincoln logs. I mean, it's
the building. And when I
meet people who don't know
how their toaster works and
are not interested in whoever
the designer was that came
up with that, I'm just
shocked. How can you not
care about that? Certain people
just care about understanding how
things work, other others don't
they just want to use
it there. They just want
it done quickly. Don't care
about anything else. Is that
genetic? I mean, this, as
soon as I saw a
CD player, I wanted to
take it apart. Yeah, no,
I think that's a big
part of programming is an
engineering. You just want to
understand how things work and
take them apart. Some people
want to do that. Some
people don't. So assuming that
you guys have that kind
of passion that you want
to do these things as
programmers, what kinds of things
do you want to enable?
What kind of scenarios do
you want to create? I
mean, right now, you know,
just like last year, shady,
you did a, you know,
a mobile banking and, and
this year you're doing, you're
doing PowerShell and doing build
scripts. You're learning how large
systems get built. And, and
Eric, you're working on administrative
consoles and asp.net two Oh.
And things like that. That's
not exactly, you know, saving,
saving babies or, you know,
what do you want to
do? Do you do, do
you want to enable new
interactions between customers? Do you
want to do music? I
mean something in programming, but
I wanna understand with these
new powers, What will you
do? I really have no
idea what I want to
do, but I know that
when I have a task
and then when I complete
the task, if I've been
struggling on it for like
a couple of days or
so, and then when I
finish it, it gives me
a really good feeling. I
feel like I've done something
and I really liked that,
but I have no idea
what I really want to
do with it. I'm guessing
kind of, I guess, in
kind of the same, I
don't really have a clear
idea of what I want
to do, but like, if
I'm doing it and I
finish it, then I can
play on it and say,
Hey, I actually did that.
That's something that I accomplished.
So it's the, it's the
Build. And then the feeling
of accomplishment and bill and
feeling of accomplishment, but you
don't have like a burning
desire to build the next
Google or like, I want
to learn to be a
programmer so that I can
solve some problem that is
like personal to you. Like
for example, I'm diabetic. So
I wanted to, you know,
write programs to help diabetics.
That was something that was
interesting to me. You know,
I didn't think I'd get
into banking. Is there anything
like that you thought about
you written programs for yourself?
I don't recall. That was
a very, very politically correct
answer. JW, if you built
any utilities, you, I built
a couple small things, but
mainly I just write, I
turn regular games into text
based games and I think
that's pretty fun. Like I,
I built a game. I
built clue out of Ruby
and had a whole bunch
of wins scenarios. You wrote
the board game clue. Yeah.
Yeah. You, you don't move
around or actually you do,
you have a certain amount
of spaces that you can
go and then you can,
ER, Is it graphical or
is this a text game?
Yeah, I thought it was
pretty fun. And you have
a certain amount of points
you can use each turn.
You can either go to
a different room or say
who did it or that
sort of thing. Yeah. Let's
see. That's so that's so
interesting because you built a
text game and I would
think that people would want
to build crazy 3d three
X-Box three 60 thing. Yeah.
That's more of a graphical
thing using like programs like
Maya. And that's just, I
mean, I guess I wouldn't
surprise, like that's how I
learned to program, right? I
mean, I think the listeners,
those of listeners that are
over 30 that was being
absorbed in those kinds of
games, you know, that was
like the bomb. Is there
a retro thing going on
here that, that you guys
dig that kind of stuff?
Well, the thing is that
I, I got kind of
a bad feeling, I guess,
for three D games or
not 3d, but games. Cause
I used a program called
game maker and it was
good for a while, but
when you actually wanted to
use it, that gooey was
really unfriendly. And so that
kind of threw me off.
So you've had a you've
rebelled and then made, made
Zurich again. Right. Well, I
can do that. I have
the abilities to do that.
Just using Ruby or just
a texting, a scripting language
really easily. So yeah. Did
you look at stuff like
the, like there's the action
a framework you can write
games for the Xbox Out
of C-sharp really? No, I
just got a book in
the mail yesterday. That's X
and a game development And
it's basically a, You pay
like 50 bucks, you get
visual studio express and then
you can download it. You
have an X box. No,
I don't. Okay. Well let's
figure something out, you know?
Oh, well we're going to
have just the control interview
is over. Oh yeah. I'll
bring, I'll bring the book
and maybe we've got an
Xbox here. Maybe we'll try
to put something together and
talk to it. Yeah. I,
I, the only thing I
know about that as some
guys don't, don't appreciate you
messing with the hex box,
but That is true. The
Xbox here at Kirlian is
sacrosanct. We shouldn't tell them
that we're going to mess
with it. Yes. So what
are some things about current
technology and current languages that
you don't like? There's, there's
a couple of things I
don't really like first off,
I guess I don't really
like seeing so much spam
in my email. So like
I get, I get around
like 50 to a hundred
messages and when general box
every day and just annoys
me, it could be in
the spam box though. Yeah.
They get in the spam
box, but just seeing it
there. Oh, seeing you there
bugs you. Yeah. Okay. Cause
sometimes like my friends would
send me links and they
ended up in the spam
box, so I have to
go fishing for them Constant
back and forth pulling stuff
in and out of spam.
Do you think about the
algorithms that the, whoever figured
that out too? What's spam
or what's not. I think
about it, but like it's
kind of hard to guess
what it actually is. Yeah.
Yeah. It must be, it
must be harder than we
think, because stuff keeps showing
up in there. It's funny
how the false positives are
really with buggy. Yeah. What
about you had originally been
a PHP programmer, which is
a kind of a loosely
type scripting language. How much
of a transition was it
for you to start doing
Sharp? I think PHP is
generally easier than C-sharp just
because it's so loose. Like
I made the transition into
C sharp and it was
sort of a pain because,
well, the syntax is similar,
but as soon as I
put it in, I got
all these errors because of
all the, all the variable
types that I had to
convert over. Yeah. So moving
things from strings to incentives
belongs. Yeah. What about you?
What about you? I'm more
of a fan of the
loose based programming languages. Cause
I'm doing PowerShell right now
and that's pretty loose and
it automatically converts things. It's
really, That's interesting because you
were, I mean last year
you were C sharp guy
and then this year you've
been PowerShell guy. Right. I
started out as a visual
basic guy and interesting just
cause that's what we was
taught and that's pretty loose.
And then I went into
Java and didn't like it
because of the reason that
I had to convert things
from strings to ins and
all the time and longs
and that just got annoying
and remembering the semi-colon, you
know, at the end of
the year I bring the
semicolon. That's why you hate
it. I hate C sharp
that damn semi-colon I'll know
it. And I don't know,
Is it feel fluid? I
mean, is it a, No,
it doesn't feel as fluid
to me. I, I, I,
I just like the looser
ones, because then it's more
of a language oriented than
a math oriented and you
have to are technical cause
with language, you know, things
are more loose and you
say one thing and it
will interpret it that way
versus with C-sharp and Java,
you have to throw it
in exactly the same way
every time. If I can
paraphrase. Are you saying that
you like the way that
John, you know, you write
it in PowerShell or in
a more dynamic and more
loosely type language and it
just, it, it knows your
intent. Well, in C-sharp you're
having to be really specific
about stuff that you don't
feel you should have to
be specific about. Like it
should be, it should be
guessing, like that's a force.
That's what I meant. I
put this and in a
string it should become a
string. That's what I meant.
You kind of tossed to
me to extremes, but that's
kind of what I'm getting
at. Okay. If that was
not a good paraphrasing, I
don't know. It was just
interesting. I mean, this is
a, a sample size of
two, right? Where, you know,
two out of two interns
believe that a loosely typed
more dynamic languages are better.
You know? And I don't
know if that, if that
is something that we're finding
just generally cause C Sharp's
making a move to being
more of a, kind of
a hybrid language, but it's,
you know, it's, it's, it's
a little slower. We're in
C sharp three, O's got
some things like variable types
that are just VAR where
you can stick a string
in there and you can
stick it in it in
there. And it's it's okay.
But you know, that's things
that are emerging. Now. I'm
wondering if the young people
are, you know, if the
day of static typing is
over and the young people
want to move back towards
that more, more, more fluid,
more fluids, my word, more
fluid languages. I think fluid
is pretty good. So you're
digging PowerShell though. Yeah. PowerShell
is awesome. But the, the
main problem I have a
certain language is just the
installation. Cause if it doesn't,
if I can't get it
running well, then it's, I'm
not going to use it.
Cause that was my main
problem with Java was we
had one textbook and then
we didn't have the right
compiler for that. And then
nobody had the skill set
to help me with that.
And then I was looking
on the internet and I'm
assuming most people already knew
what they were doing. And
I was just a new
open. They, I didn't know
where to get help from.
So the kind of initial,
initial hump of like, what
exactly do I need to
start programming and make it
work? Right? Yeah. Like I
remember that we had a
lot of trouble getting your
box to build because we
had to install all these
prerequisites and stuff. Exactly. Yeah.
Of course. With PowerShell, with
Ruby, it's pretty much self
contained. Yeah. Yeah. Ruby, even
more so than power show.
Cause PowerShell, I was setting
up power tab from my
one eye, which is awesome
though. Yeah. It was pretty
hot. That's the tab completion
stuff for PowerShell. It's awesome.
Yeah. Mao who wrote that
is an awesome guy. So
last question here when I
retire and when we retire,
right? The old guys, what
are you guys going to
to change? Well, I, I
want things to be more
compatible with each other. For
instance, I don't like the
iPod at all, just because
it's so incompatible with other
machines. I mean, it just
sucks. I like things more
like that. Creatives, MP three
players. Cause they're just a
lot easier to deal with.
You can toss in whatever
you want. You don't have
to use iTunes to convert
them. You can toss in
MP3s waves, whatever you're in
the mood for or WMA,
but what the iPod, it's
all about the  format.
And it's tough getting things
into that stuff, getting things
out of that. And it's
just not compatible with other
programs and things like that.
So I'm hearing openness is
something that's important. I mean
that the right things should
work together. Things should, inter-operate
no one should be locked
into something. And if you
don't like a tool, if
you like, if you like
the iPod, but you don't
like iTunes, it should be
alternatives. Right. And there are
some, but ultimately 99% of
people use iTunes. Right. And
I like alternatives instead of
just having one main thing
that controls everything. Okay. That's
a good question. What about
you, Eric? What are you
going to change? When, when
I'm dead? I guess I
wouldn't change as much in
the software aspect, but like,
I don't really particularly like
the way computers are right
now because at home I
still, even though I have
one of those flat screen
monitors, it's still pretty hard
to keep your eyes on
it for pretty much hours
at a time when I'm
working on a project. And
like my wrists tend to
tighten up, like if I'm
a keyboard too much. So
maybe a different type of
design for the computer screen.
And do you like tablets?
Do you like touch screens?
Do you think that's where
the answer is possibly? Like,
it depends on how someone
would design it. Like what
can you be more specific?
Like I know that there's
talk about gestures. Like I
was, I've always wanted to
be able to just wave
my hand in front of
my screen and minimize my
windows. Yeah. That would be
pretty cool, but you'd have
to be pretty accurate to
like move one or the
other we have. But if
somebody, if somebody said that
and then didn't try, because
I said, well, gosh, I
don't know if that's going
to work. Then it never
would actually happen. Right. Yeah.
I mean, I never would
have believed the iPhone or
like, you know, the Microsoft
surface where it's like the
entire coffee table is a
monitor and I can move
stuff around with my fingers,
but you know, somebody ultimately
has to do that. And
at this point when I'm
old and gray, it's gotta
be you guys. Do you
think that you're up for
it if I'm not on
a couch watching TV? Sure.
Yeah. Okay. So this has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes with the interns here
at Trillium shady and Eric.
Thanks guys for taking time
out of your busy day.
And I get back to
work, stop screwing around and
you won't be paid for
this half an hour. We'll
see you next week. Bye
bye.